<h1> 🏁 Sprint 1 - OpenVPN site-to-site with Paris server and Tokyo/NY clients </h1>

## Sprint Objectives

The aim of this first sprint is to deploy the basic infrastructure for the VPN by setting a site-to-site OpenVPN tunnel between Tokyo/NY clients and the primary site (Paris Montrouge).

- Deploy OpenVPN on  the primary server site (Paris Montrouge) 
- Connect Tokyo & New York clients to the central site  via an unsecured network (Internet)
- Check routing and inter-site communication

## Technical Specifications
* **Protocol**: OpenVPN (VPN SSL/TLS) over UDP transport layer.
* **Security**: Strong authentication via public key infrastructure (X.509 PKI) and asymmetric encryption for key exchange (2048-bit Diffie-Hellman).
* **Addressing Architecture**:
  * **VPN Network (tun0)**: `10.9.1.0/24`
  * **IP WAN Publique (Paris and Auber)** : 88.162.141.79
  * **Primary Site (Paris)**: VPN IP `10.9.1.1` | Physical LAN: `192.168.1.197` | Inter-site link: `192.168.100.200`
  * **Tokyo Site**: Fixed VPN IP `10.9.1.2` | Remote Local LAN: `172.20.10.0/28` (VM: `172.20.10.3`)
  * **New York Site**: Fixed VPN IP `10.9.1.3` | Remote Local LAN: `172.20.10.0/28` (VM: `172.20.10.4`)
  * **Backup Site (Aubervilliers)**: No active tunnel at this stage | Inter-site: `192.168.100.210`


## 1. PKI Setup 
The ideal authentication solution to use for implementing an OpenVPN tunnel is using X.509 certificates. This significantly improves security by ensuring that each peer/entity (here the servers and the clients) proves its identity using a chain of trust.

Certificates will be generated by the PKI tools openssl.

The full PKI setup (CA creation, key generation, certificate signing, installation steps) is documented here:
[Authentication via SSL/TLS certificates](pki-certificate-authentication.md)

## 🔧 2. OpenVPN Configuration 

Full configuration files are available in the `configs/openvpn/` directory.

Only the directives relevant to the architecture are documented here:

### Key OpenVPN Directives (Server)

- `server 10.9.1.0 255.255.255.0` - Defines the VPN tunnel network, that will be used by server/client(s)

- `client-config-dir /etc/openvpn/ccd` - Enables per-client static IP assignment and iroute.
[View more details in the "Static VPN IP Assignment (CCD)" part](####-Static-VPN-IP-Assignment-(CCD)) 

- `push "route 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0"` - Allows clients to reach the LAN behind Paris.

- `route 172.20.10.0 255.255.255.240` - Ensures Paris routes traffic to the Tokyo/NY LAN via the VPN.

- `client-to-client` - Allows VPN clients to communicate with each other.

- `port 1194` - server listenning port

**Server TLS authentication using the PKI created in this sprint.**
- `ca` -  the CA certificate used to validate the server’s identity.
- `cert` - server certificate signed by the CA. 
- `key` -  Private key of the server.
- `dh` -
- `tls-server` - this configuration is for a TLS server
  

---

### Key OpenVPN Directives (Clients)

- `remote 88.162.141.79 32768` - Connection to the Server (WAN/Public IP and port of Paris VPN server)

- `client`- Indicates that this configuration is for a OpenVPN client

**Client TLS authentication using the PKI created in this sprint.**
- `ca` -  the CA certificate used to validate the server’s identity.
- `cert` - client certificate signed by the CA. 
- `key` -  private key of the client
- `tls-client` - this configuration is for a TLS server

---

## 3. Routing Configuration

###  Server Push Routes
```
push "route 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0"
push "route 192.168.100.0 255.255.255.0"
push "route 172.20.10.0 255.255.255.240"
```

**Goal**: Clients (Tokyo/NY) dynamically receive these routes when connecting to the VPN server.

### iroute (OpenVPN Internal Routing Table) & Static VPN IP Assignment (CCD)
To ensure that the OpenVPN server correctly forwards traffic to the right client, each remote client  must be explicitly mapped to the corresponding client certificate (based on the Common Name (CN)) using CCD entries & is assigned a static IP address.

1. In Paris OpenVPN server configuration, enable the CCD : `client-config-dir /etc/openvpn/ccd`

2. Create the CCD configuration files by matching the client certificate CN (filename) then add iroute entries to map each remote LAN IP to the correct client :
   * `/etc/openvpn/ccd/client-tokyo`:
       ```text
       iroute 172.20.10.3 255.255.255.255
       ```
   * `/etc/openvpn/ccd/client-ny`:
       ```text
       iroute 172.20.10.4 255.255.255.255
       ```

CDD configuration files are available in the `configs/openvpn/ccd` directory.

**Key Concept of OpenVPN**: 

OpenVPN, when operating in multi‑client mode, implements its own software switching layer. This means it uses two routing tables:
- Linux kernel routing table → decides which interface (tun0) the packet should use
- OpenVPN internal routing table (iroute) → decides which client the packet must be delivered to

**Why iroute is mandatory**: 

Even if the Linux kernel knows that a client subnet (ex : 172.20.10.0/28) must be sent through tun0, the OpenVPN daemon still needs to know which client owns this subnet.
Without an iroute entry, Linux forwards the packet to tun0 & OpenVPN receives the packet. But OpenVPN does not know which encrypted tunnel corresponds to the subnet  specified. In result, OpenVPN silently drops the packet 
This is exactly what happens when Paris tries to ping Tokyo using its LAN IP (172.20.10.3) without iroute.
See the [Troubleshooting – Missing iroute](##troubleshooting--missing-iroute) section for details.

**Goal** : Server receive the system route `172.20.10.0/28 dev tun0`

### Routing on Auber
Contains the return route 10.9.1.0/24 via 192.168.100.200 on interface enp0s8.
    
## 4. NAT and Perimeter Security
To enable remote offices (Client Tokyo and NY) to initiate a connection to the central server located behind a home router, a port forwarding rule and local firewall settings have been configured on Paris site.

**Port Forwarding (home router)**
- Public WAN IP: `88.162.141.79`
- Rule applied: `From everywhere on Internet connecting to external port UDP/32768 ➔ to 192.168.1.197 on internal port 1194`

**Firewall Opening (UFW)**
- By default, the standard OpenVPN port was blocked so UDP traffic must be allowed in the local firewall (on Ubuntu) :
```bash
ufw allow 1194/udp
```

## 5. Starting OpenVPN Services </h2>
The configuration files are stored in the root folder `configs/openvpn/`. 

They are loaded by:
```bash
# Paris server
systemctl start openvpn@server-parismont
```

```bash
# Remote clients
systemctl start openvpn@client-tokyo-parismont
systemctl start openvpn@client-NY-parismont
```

## 6. Validation  / Connectivity - Cahier de Recette & Validation Générale (Matrice de Tests)

Note : in the wireshark captures, the VPN IP of Tokyo client is seen as `10.9.1.6` but we have changed it after by `10.9.1.2`.
 le résultat du ping réussi sur la liaison inter-serveurs (192.168.100.200 <-> 192.168.100.210) et les pings des clients vers internet.
 
### Ping Tests - Tunnel Connectivity ✅
- Tokyo → VPN Server Paris (@IP `10.9.1.1`)
[Ping_OK_Tokyo-Paris-VPN](../assets/verifs/ping-tokyo-to-paris-VPN.png)
[Capture-Wireshark](../assets/wireshark/openvpn_icmp_ping-tokyo-to-paris-VPN.png)

Here is a summary of the process that happen : 
1. When Tokyo sends a ping to `10.9.1.1`, OpenVPN encapsulates it in an encrypted tunnel and sends it to the WAN IP of VPN Paris Server (`88.162.141.79:32768`).
3. The Paris home router forwards the packet to the Paris VPN server on the LAN (`192.168.1.197:1194`).
4. The Paris VPN server decrypts the packet & responds to the ping. The response is encapsulated in OpenVPN to return to Tokyo.

• ICMP Echo Request/Reply packets encapsulated within OpenVPN packets (UDP/1194) are observed between `37.174.64.197` (IP WAN Tokyo) and `88.162.141.79` (IP WAN Paris).
• Once decrypted, the ICMP packets appear between `10.9.1.2` (Tokyo) and `10.9.1.1` (Montrouge) inside the tunnel interface.

- Paris → Tokyo (`10.9.1.2`)
- Backup site Auber → Tokyo (`10.9.1.2`) 

---

### Ping Tests - LAN Access (Paris/Auber) ✅
- Tokyo → Server Paris LAN (@IP `192.168.1.197`)
[Ping_OK_Tokyo-Paris-LAN](../assets/verifs/ping-tokyo-paris-lan-ok.png)
[Capture-Wireshark](../assets/wireshark/openvpn_icmp_ping-tokyo-to-paris-LAN.png)

- Tokyo → Backup site (internal @IP `192.168.100.210`)
[Ping_OK_Tokyo-Auber-internal-LAN](../assets/verifs/ping-tokyo-internal-lan-auber-ok.png)
[Capture-Wireshark](../assets/wireshark/openvpn_icmp_ping-tokyo-to-auber-internal-IP-192.168.100.210.png)

 
- Server Paris → Tokyo (`172.20.10.3`)
 [Ping_OK_Paris-Tokyo-LAN](../assets/verifs/ping-paris-tokyo-lan-ok.png)

- Backup site Auber → Tokyo (`172.20.10.3`)
[Ping_OK_Auber-Tokyo-LAN](../assets/verifs/ping-auber-tokyo-lan-ok.png)
[Capture-Wireshark](../assets/wireshark/openvpn_icmp_ping-auber-to-tokyo-VPN.png)
---
 <!--
### HTTP Test / HTTP connectivity  via tunnel for Validation Applicative  & Franchissement Filtrage ✅
    wget from Tokyo → Paris
    wget from NY → Paris
    wget from Tokyo → Auber
    wget from NY → Auber

---

### Wireshark Captures
    Before tunnel
    After tunnel
    Encapsulation analysis
    UDP/1194
    ICMP inside OpenVP
➡️ [Capture-wireshark-connectivity-script0](assets/wireshark)

10.9.1.0/24
-->

## 7.Troubleshooting & Fixes
During the acceptance testing phase, several issues of ping were identified and resolved.

---

### ❌ Incident A - Ping fails Tokyo → LAN Paris (192.168.1.197)
- **Symptom**: The tunnel is working (ping `10.9.1.1` OK), but the server’s physical interface cannot be reached.

- **Cause**: The routing table on the Tokyo OS is not aware of the subnet behind Paris (`192.168.1.0/24`) and is sending packets to its default internet gateway.
 
- **Solution** : Addition of the route injection directive to the OpenVPN Paris server configuration:
`push "route 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0"`

**Proof/Result** : 
On Tokyo, a route has been added to the Paris LAN via the tunnel.
[Routing Table Tokyo](../assets/verifs/routing-table-tokyo-sprint0.png)


---

### ❌Incident B - Ping fails Tokyo → Auber (192.168.100.210)

- **Symptom**: Ping requests from Tokyo to the Aubervilliers inter-site interface fail.

- **Causes**:
    - Linux kernel IP forwarding was not enabled in Paris.
    - The OS routing table on the Tokyo is not aware of the subnet behind Paris (`192.168.100.0/24`) and is sending packets to its default internet gateway.
    - Aubervilliers does not know where to route responses to the `10.9.1.0/24` VPN network. Its routing table is not aware of this VPN network and is sending packets to its default internet gateway.
      
- **Solutions**:
   - Permanent activation of system forwarding on the Paris server (```net.ipv4.ip_forward=1```).
   - Injection of the LAN route to remote clients via the Paris server: `push ‘route 192.168.100.0 255.255.255.0’`
   - Addition of a static route on the Aubervilliers table routing to instruct it to route via Paris to reach the tunnel network:
   ```bash
   ip route add 10.9.1.0/24 via 192.168.100.200 dev enp0s8
   ```

**Proof/Result** : 
On Tokyo, a route has been added to the Internal LAN Paris-Auber  via the tunnel.
[Routing Table Tokyo](../assets/verifs/routing-table-tokyo-sprint0.png)

A traceroute to the Auber internal LAN confirms also the utilization of the VPN tunnel as gw :
[Traceroute-tokyo-to-auber-internal-LAN](../assets/verifs/traceroute-tokyo_auber-internal-lan.png)

On Auber, a route has been added to the VPN network via the internal interface Auber-Paris.
[Routing Table Auber](../assets/verifs/routing-table-auber-sprint0.png)


---

### ❌ Incident C - Ping fails Paris → Tokyo (172.20.10.3)  Fails 

- **Symptom**: The Linux kernel in Paris does indeed have the system route (`route 172.20.10.0...`), and wireshark shows the packet entering the tun0 interface, but the packet never reaches the Tokyo VM.

- **Causes** :
   - *Analysis & Key Concept of OpenVPN*: OpenVPN in multi-client mode manages its own software switching architecture. The Linux kernel forwards the packet to OpenVPN via tun0, but the OpenVPN application does not know which encrypted tunnel (which client certificate) the `172.20.10.0/28` subnet is attached to. The lack of software mapping results that OpenVPN silently drop the paquet.
   - Paris does not know where to route responses to the `172.20.10.0/24` LAN network (not route to this network in its table routing) so it is sending packets to its default internet gateway.

- **Solutions**: Declare the iroute directive in the specific CCD entry for each client on the Paris server:
   - In `/etc/openvpn/ccd/client-tokyo` ➔ `iroute 172.20.10.3 255.255.255.255`
   - In `/etc/openvpn/ccd/client-NY` ➔ `iroute 172.20.10.4 255.255.255.255`
   
   - Declare a dynamic route on Paris to instruct it to route via the VPN tunnel to reach the LAN network of Tokyo:
   ```route 172.20.10.0 255.255.255.240```

**Proof/Result** : 
On Paris, a route has been added to the Tokyo LAN via the tunnel.
[Routing Table Paris](../assets/verifs/routing-table-paris-sprint0.png)

---

### ❌ Incident D - HTTP Request fails Tokyo → Auber  (`192.168.100.210`)
- **Symptom**: Pings to the Aubervilliers web server (`192.168.100.210`) work, but HTTP requests (curl/wget) get stuck in a loop (timeout).

- **Cause**: The default policy for the Linux firewall in Paris is set to FORWARD DROP. ICMP packets were passing through UFW exceptions, but TCP traffic (port 80) routed between the virtual interface tun0 and the physical interface enp0s8 was being dropped by Netfilter FORWARD policy of Paris.

- **Solution**
```bash
iptables -A FORWARD -i tun0 -o enp0s8 -j ACCEPT
```

<!--
---❌    Missing CCD entries
-->

*Note  : the anomalies are the same between Tokyo client and NY client so the troubleshooting is similar. (just replace the VPN/LAN IP of Tokyo IPs by the VPN/LAN IP of NY IPs on the configuration)*

<!-- 
Puis tu racontes :
problème de routage
problème FORWARD UFW
problème retour ICMP
problème push route
-->
